Add some details of custom CA certs (#3645)
raspberrypi/documentation: documentation/asciidoc/computers/raspberry-pi/boot-http.adoc

NET_INSTALL_ENABLED=0
```

boot.img and its associated boot.sig file is a ram disk containg a boot file system, see xref:raspberry-pi.adoc#boot_ramdisk[boot_ramdisk] for more details.

HTTP in the `BOOT_ORDER` will be ignored if secure boot is enabled and xref:raspberry-pi.adoc#HTTP_HOST[HTTP_HOST] is not set.

=== Requirements

> To use HTTP boot, xref:raspberry-pi.adoc#bootloader_update_stable[update the bootloader] to a bootloader dated 10th March 2022 or later. HTTP boot only works over Ethernet, so you need to connect your Raspberry Pi to your network via an Ethernet cable, e.g. to a socket on the back of your router. Custom CA certificates are supported on 2712 devices with a bootlader dated 5th April 2024 or later.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To use HTTP boot, xref:raspberry-pi.adoc#bootloader_update_stable[update] to a bootloader released 10th March 2022 or later. HTTP boot requires a wired Ethernet connection.

To use custom CA certificates, xref:raspberry-pi.adoc#bootloader_update_stable[update the bootloader] to a bootloader released 5th April 2024 or later. Only devices running the BCM2712 CPU support custom CA certificates.
```

NET_INSTALL_ENABLED=0
```

`boot.img` and the `boot.sig` signature file is a ram disk containing a boot file system. For more details, see xref:raspberry-pi.adoc#boot_ramdisk[boot_ramdisk].

HTTP in the `BOOT_ORDER` will be ignored if secure boot is enabled and xref:raspberry-pi.adoc#HTTP_HOST[HTTP_HOST] is not set.

=== Requirements

To use HTTP boot, xref:raspberry-pi.adoc#bootloader_update_stable[update] to a bootloader released 10th March 2022 or later. HTTP boot requires a wired Ethernet connection.

> To use custom CA certificates, xref:raspberry-pi.adoc#bootloader_update_stable[update the bootloader] to a bootloader released 5th April 2024 or later. Only devices running the BCM2712 CPU support custom CA certificates.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To use custom CA certificates, xref:raspberry-pi.adoc#bootloader_update_stable[update] to a bootloader released 5th April 2024 or later. Only devices running the BCM2712 CPU support custom CA certificates.
```

rpi-eeprom-digest -i boot.img -o boot.sig -k myprivkey.pem
----

> === Certificates
> 
> For security the Network install feature uses HTTPS to download the image from the Raspberry Pi website. It uses our own CA root included in the bootloader so it can verify it's talking to the correct host.
> 
> Since the 5th April 2024, 2712 devices have had the ability to add their own custom CA certificate to the eeprom to securely download images from their own web sites. To achieve this, the DER encoded certificate is added with the new `--cacertder` option in the `rpi-eeprom-config` tool.
> 
> To ensure that the certificate is not modified, a hash of the certificate must be placed in the eeprom config settings and a key used to guard against tampering.
> 
> ----
> # Generate a DER encoded certificate
> openssl x509 -in your_ca_root_cert.pem -out cert.der -outform DER
> 
> # generate the hash of the certificate
> sha256sum cert.der
> 701bd97f67b0f5483a9734e6e5cf72f9a123407b346088638f597878563193fc  cert.der
> ----
> 
> Update boot.conf to include the hash of the certificate
> 
> ----
> [all]
> BOOT_UART=1
> POWER_OFF_ON_HALT=0
> BOOT_ORDER=0xf461
> 
> [gpio8=0]
> BOOT_ORDER=0xf7
> NET_INSTALL_ENABLED=0
> HTTP_HOST=yourserver.org
> HTTP_PATH=path/to/files
> HTTP_CACERT_HASH=701bd97f67b0f5483a9734e6e5cf72f9a123407b346088638f597878563193fc
> ----
> 
> NOTE: If `HTTP_CACERT_HASH` is specified it assumes that you want to use HTTPS and changes to use port 443 for the download.
> 
> ----
> # Add everything to the eeprom
> ../tools/rpi-eeprom-config -c boot.conf -p public_key.pem -o pieeprom.bin --cacertder cert.der pieeprom.original.bin
> ../tools/rpi-eeprom-digest -k private_key.pem -i pieeprom.bin -o pieeprom.sig
> ----
> 
> On boot it should use HTTPS instead of HTTP.
> 
> ----
> Loading boot.img ...
> HTTP: GET request for https://yourserver.org:443/path/to/files/boot.sig
> HTTP: GET request for https://yourserver.org:443/path/to/files/boot.img
> ----
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
=== Certificates

For security, Network Install uses HTTPS to download OS images from the Raspberry Pi website. This feature uses our own CA root included in the bootloader to verify the host.

You can add your own custom CA certificate to the EEPROM to securely download images from your own website. Use the `--cacertder` option of the `rpi-eeprom-config` tool to add the DER-encoded certificate.

To ensure that the certificate is not modified, place a hash of the certificate in the EEPROM config settings.

Run the following command to generate a DER-encoded certificate:

[source,console]
----
$ openssl x509 -in your_ca_root_cert.pem -out cert.der -outform DER
----

Then, run the following command to generate a SHA-256 hash of the certificate:

[source,console]
----
$ sha256sum cert.der
----

You should see output similar to the following:

----
701bd97f67b0f5483a9734e6e5cf72f9a123407b346088638f597878563193fc  cert.der
----

Next, update `boot.conf` to include the hash of the certificate:

[source,console]
----
$ sudo rpi-eeprom-config --edit
----

Configure the following settings in the `[gpio8=0]` section, replacing:

* `<your_website>` with your website, e.g. `raspberrypi.com`
* `<path_to_image>` with the path to your OS image hosted on your website, e.g. `path/to/image`
* `<hash>` with the hash value you generated above, e.g. `701bd97f67b0f5483a9734e6e5cf72f9a123407b346088638f597878563193fc`

----
[all]
BOOT_UART=1
POWER_OFF_ON_HALT=0
BOOT_ORDER=0xf461

[gpio8=0]
BOOT_ORDER=0xf7
NET_INSTALL_ENABLED=0
HTTP_HOST=<your_website>
HTTP_PATH=<path_to_image>
HTTP_CACERT_HASH=<hash>
----

NOTE: If you specify a `HTTP_CACERT_HASH`, Network Install downloads the image using HTTPS over port 443.

Finally, use to load everything into EEPROM:

[source,console]
----
$ rpi-eeprom-config -c boot.conf -p public_key.pem -o pieeprom.bin --cacertder cert.der pieeprom.original.bin
$ rpi-eeprom-digest -k private_key.pem -i pieeprom.bin -o pieeprom.sig
----

During network boot, your Raspberry Pi should use HTTPS instead of HTTP. You can check the boot output for the HTTPS URL:

----
Loading boot.img ...
HTTP: GET request for https://yourserver.org:443/path/to/files/boot.sig
HTTP: GET request for https://yourserver.org:443/path/to/files/boot.img
----

```

TL;DR: I made it prettier.

Reviewer 2: "Finally, use to load everything..." doesn't sound right?

----

=== Certificates

For security, Network Install uses HTTPS to download OS images from the Raspberry Pi website. This feature uses our own CA root included in the bootloader to verify the host.

You can add your own custom CA certificate to the EEPROM to securely download images from your own website. Use the `--cacertder` option of the `rpi-eeprom-config` tool to add the DER-encoded certificate.

To ensure that the certificate is not modified, place a hash of the certificate in the EEPROM config settings.

Run the following command to generate a DER-encoded certificate:

[source,console]
----
$ openssl x509 -in your_ca_root_cert.pem -out cert.der -outform DER
----

Then, run the following command to generate a SHA-256 hash of the certificate:

[source,console]
----
$ sha256sum cert.der
----

You should see output similar to the following:

----
701bd97f67b0f5483a9734e6e5cf72f9a123407b346088638f597878563193fc  cert.der
----

Next, update `boot.conf` to include the hash of the certificate:

[source,console]
----
$ sudo rpi-eeprom-config --edit
----

Configure the following settings in the `[gpio8=0]` section, replacing:

> * `<your_website>` with your website, e.g. `raspberrypi.com`

Reviewer 2: Perhaps the "e.g. `raspberrypi.com`" should be changed to "e.g. `raspberrypi.com`" so that it matches the `yourserver.org` in the "You can check the boot output for the HTTPS URL" section?
Similarly, perhaps the `path/to/image` in the next line should be updated to match the `path/to/files` in the example boot output?

Author: I think this gets the message aross?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `<your_website>` with xref:raspberry-pi.adoc#HTTP_HOST[your website], e.g. `yourserver.org`
```

* `<path_to_image>` with the path to your OS image hosted on your website, e.g. `path/to/image`
* `<hash>` with the hash value you generated above, e.g. `701bd97f67b0f5483a9734e6e5cf72f9a123407b346088638f597878563193fc`

----
[all]
BOOT_UART=1
POWER_OFF_ON_HALT=0
BOOT_ORDER=0xf461

[gpio8=0]
BOOT_ORDER=0xf7
NET_INSTALL_ENABLED=0
HTTP_HOST=<your_website>
HTTP_PATH=<path_to_image>
HTTP_CACERT_HASH=<hash>
----

> NOTE: If you specify a `HTTP_CACERT_HASH`, Network Install downloads the image using HTTPS over port 443.

Reviewer 2: Does this mean that if you _don't_ specify a  `HTTP_CACERT_HASH` then Network Install won't download the image using HTTPS, and therefore **also** won't use the custom CA certificate? :thinking:

Author: yes

Finally, use to load everything into EEPROM:

[source,console]
----
$ rpi-eeprom-config -c boot.conf -p public_key.pem -o pieeprom.bin --cacertder cert.der pieeprom.original.bin

> $ rpi-eeprom-digest -k private_key.pem -i pieeprom.bin -o pieeprom.sig

Reviewer 2: Are the `public_key.pem` and `private_key.pem` filenames mentioned here supposed to be the same as the `mypubkey.pem` and `myprivkey.pem` mentioned in the "Keys" section of this page?

Also @peterharperuk I just noticed that the "Requirements" section of the page says "To use HTTP boot, update the bootloader to a bootloader dated 10th March 2022 or later." but I guess that's only applicable to the Pi4, and the Pi5 will have a different firmware date in which HTTP boot was made available?

Author: yes, this needs a bootloader after 5th April 2024

----

During network boot, your Raspberry Pi should use HTTPS instead of HTTP. You can check the boot output for the HTTPS URL:

----
Loading boot.img ...
HTTP: GET request for https://yourserver.org:443/path/to/files/boot.sig

> HTTP: GET request for https://yourserver.org:443/path/to/files/boot.img

Reviewer 2: This may well be a stupid question (because I'm tired), but how does the firmware know to download both `https://yourserver.org:443/path/to/files/boot.sig` and `https://yourserver.org:443/path/to/files/boot.img` ?
Is `HTTP_PATH` in the eeprom-config set to `path/to/files/boot.img` (with the firmware then doing an extension-swap to get `path/to/files/boot.sig`); or is `HTTP_PATH` set to `path/to/files` (with this then meaning that your hosted OS image **has** to be named `boot.img`) ?

Reviewer 2: Ah, https://www.raspberrypi.com/documentation/computers/raspberry-pi.html#HTTP_HOST and https://www.raspberrypi.com/documentation/computers/raspberry-pi.html#HTTP_PATH answer my question (i.e. it's the latter), so perhaps this needs to be made a little bit clearer in this page?

=== Certificates

For security, Network Install uses HTTPS to download OS images from the Raspberry Pi website. This feature uses our own CA root included in the bootloader to verify the host.

You can add your own custom CA certificate to the EEPROM to securely download images from your own website. Use the `--cacertder` option of the `rpi-eeprom-config` tool to add the DER-encoded certificate.

To ensure that the certificate is not modified, place a hash of the certificate in the EEPROM config settings.

Run the following command to generate a DER-encoded certificate:

[source,console]
----
$ openssl x509 -in your_ca_root_cert.pem -out cert.der -outform DER
----

Then, run the following command to generate a SHA-256 hash of the certificate:

[source,console]
----
$ sha256sum cert.der
----

You should see output similar to the following:

----
701bd97f67b0f5483a9734e6e5cf72f9a123407b346088638f597878563193fc  cert.der
----

Next, update `boot.conf` to include the hash of the certificate:

[source,console]
----
$ sudo rpi-eeprom-config --edit
----

Configure the following settings in the `[gpio8=0]` section, replacing:

* `<your_website>` with your website, e.g. `raspberrypi.com`

> * `<path_to_image>` with the path to your OS image hosted on your website, e.g. `path/to/image`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `<path_to_files>` with the xref:raspberry-pi.adoc#HTTP_PATH[path to your OS image] hosted on your website, e.g. `path/to/files`
```

* `<hash>` with the hash value you generated above, e.g. `701bd97f67b0f5483a9734e6e5cf72f9a123407b346088638f597878563193fc`

----
[all]
BOOT_UART=1
POWER_OFF_ON_HALT=0
BOOT_ORDER=0xf461

[gpio8=0]
BOOT_ORDER=0xf7
NET_INSTALL_ENABLED=0
HTTP_HOST=<your_website>

> HTTP_PATH=<path_to_image>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
HTTP_PATH=<path_to_files>
```

HTTP_CACERT_HASH=<hash>
----

> NOTE: If you specify a `HTTP_CACERT_HASH`, https downloads are enabled and port 443 is used instead of port 80.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When you specify a `HTTP_CACERT_HASH`, Network Install downloads the image using HTTPS over port 443 instead of HTTP over port 80.
```

Run the following command to generate a DER-encoded certificate:

[source,console]
----
$ openssl x509 -in your_ca_root_cert.pem -out cert.der -outform DER
----

Then, run the following command to generate a SHA-256 hash of the certificate:

[source,console]
----
$ sha256sum cert.der
----

You should see output similar to the following:

----
701bd97f67b0f5483a9734e6e5cf72f9a123407b346088638f597878563193fc  cert.der
----

Next, update `boot.conf` to include the hash of the certificate:

[source,console]
----
$ sudo rpi-eeprom-config --edit
----

Configure the following settings in the `[gpio8=0]` section, replacing:

* `<your_website>` with xref:raspberry-pi.adoc#HTTP_HOST[your website], e.g. `yourserver.org`
* `<path_to_files>` with the xref:raspberry-pi.adoc#HTTP_PATH[path to your OS image] hosted on your website, e.g. `path/to/files`
* `<hash>` with the hash value you generated above, e.g. `701bd97f67b0f5483a9734e6e5cf72f9a123407b346088638f597878563193fc`

----
[all]
BOOT_UART=1
POWER_OFF_ON_HALT=0
BOOT_ORDER=0xf461

[gpio8=0]
BOOT_ORDER=0xf7
NET_INSTALL_ENABLED=0
HTTP_HOST=<your_website>
HTTP_PATH=<path_to_files>
HTTP_CACERT_HASH=<hash>
----

> When you specify a `HTTP_CACERT_HASH`, Network Install downloads the image using HTTPS over port 443 instead of HTTP over port 80.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When you specify a `HTTP_CACERT_HASH`, Network Install downloads the image using HTTPS over port 443. Without a hash, Network install downloads the image using HTTP over port 80.
```

Finally, use the following commands to load everything into EEPROM:

[source,console]
----
$ rpi-eeprom-config -c boot.conf -p mypubkey.pem -o pieeprom.bin --cacertder cert.der pieeprom.original.bin
$ rpi-eeprom-digest -k myprivkey.pem -i pieeprom.bin -o pieeprom.sig
----

> During network boot, your Raspberry Pi should use HTTPS instead of HTTP. You can check the boot output for the HTTPS URL:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
During network boot, your Raspberry Pi should use HTTPS instead of HTTP. To see the full HTTPS URL resolved by Network Install for the download, check the boot output:
```
